virginia regional hikes
updated: 2018/3/15
Southwest Virginia is currently our home. We are located in the middle of Appalachia where the Application Trail runs right through.
This portion of this site is dedicated to our experiences and opinions about hikes in this area (more in the form of a trip report). The order of these hikes reflect my personal preferences of the hikes. A big caveat of hiking in Virginia is that the same hike is different depending on the season. So your own experience will definitely vary. For more of a guide to regional hikes and a great resource that I will cite throughout, see Hiking Upwards.
As you can see, I’ve only wrote about a portion of the trails we’ve hiked in the area so far. I am working to get to write all the ones I’ve done in time. This is a work in progress.
trailhead map
Below is an interactive google map with the trailhead location for each of the hikes I’ve written about. You can click on each one for the direct link of the report on the hike. Each hike is labeled with my personal rankings, based on the ones with reports.
John’s personal rankings
Old Rag Mountain
Grayson Highlands Loop
Tinker Cliffs via Andy Layne Trail
The Cascades and Barney’s Wall
Apple Orchard Falls and Cornelius Creek Loop
Channels of Virginia
Harper’s Ferry – Maryland Heights Loop
Dragon’s Tooth
Devil’s Marbleyard
McAfee Knob
Devil’s Bathtub
Great Falls Maryland in Chesapeake & Ohio Canal NHP: Billy Goat A & B Loop
Great Falls Park Virginia: Difficult Run Loop
Catoctin Mountain Park & Cunningham Falls Loop
The Priest and Crabtree Falls
Strickler Knob via Scothorn Gap
Goshen Pass and Jump Rock Loop
Wilson Mountain & Sprout Run Trail Loop
Big and Little House Mountains
Peaks of Otter: Sharp Top
Peaks of Otter: Flat Top & Fallingwater Cascades
Carvin Cove and Hay Rock
Spy Rock
Angel’s Rest
Dismal Creek and Sugar Mountain Loop with Dismal Falls
Rock Castle Gorge
Falls Ridge Preserve
Poor Mountain Natural Reserve Loop
Cold Mountain
Bottom Creek Gorge
Blue Suck Falls Loop – Douthat State Park
Bear Church Rock
Hidden Valley
Kelly’s Knob
Read Mountain
Share this:
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Google+ (Opens in new window)
