We invite you to visit the Magic Trail of Szklarska Poreba. We particularly recommend:
The Magical Trail of the Mountain Spirit - The magical garden of history, traditions, beliefs, magic and nature is extending among the green forests in the valley of the Kamienna River, on the slopes of the Karkonosze and Jizera Mountains. Its ruler is the Spirit of the Mountains, called Karkonosz, Rzepiór, or Liczyrzepa. Unpredictable as the forces of nature. Sometimes ruthless, sometimes gracious and caring. He is probably as old as the mountains. Lord of his lands, diligently guarding the underground treasure and caring for living creatures within his kingdom. The Magical Trail of the Mountain Spirit, which was designed for family travels, is already at your disposal. In the most interesting points of the route there are granite boulders containing mysterious holograms. These characters are part of a game field, in which everyone can participate. more ...
Trip to Trifle - If you want to look at tourism from a slightly different perspective, choose the "Trip to Trifle" The Big Sztaudynger Tourist Trail. You will have an opportunity to commune not only with beautiful landscapes, but also with the works of master of the short form, for some time resident of our city, Jan Sztaudynger. The route was planned around the city, and in 14 specific points information boards were erected. On each of them is a brief description of the place where it is located, information about Jan Sztaudynger and a trifle of its authorship. The slogan of the tour is a poem written by Sztaudynger "Landscapes like grains". Going the whole tour takes about 7-10 hours, but because it runs around the city, you can – if tired -direct your steps to the center at any point. more ...
The Walloon Trail - They were old seekers of minerals and precious stones, who arrived in the Karkonosze and the Jizera Mountains. The name included: "...any foreign Venetians, Florentines, or other Walloons, who searched the mountains as mountain men, treasure or precious stone hunters, or in experts glass-making." The trail leads from Lower Szklarska Poreba, from the cemetery church of Our Lady of the Rosary (convenient parking lots are found here), near the Judiciary Linden Tree, near the location of the oldest glass factory, through the Kamieńczyk valley, then through the Szklarki waterfall, and the Old Cottage Walloon, the Museum of the Earth, Wlastimil Hofman Museum, the Golden View, Tomb of Karkonosz, to the Wobbling Stone and back to the parking lot in Lower Szklarska Poreba. more ...
