ASK ME
Send me your questions about hiking, backpacking, gear, or any trip I write about at The Big Outside.
Email
Share on Tumblr
I can help you plan the best backpacking, hiking, or family adventure of your life.
For more than two decades, as a former field editor for Backpacker magazine and running this blog, I have had the good fortune of hiking and backpacking all over America and the world. I’ve made a living identifying, planning, and writing about great trips. That’s why The Big Outside is a uniquely authoritative resource for outdoor adventures.
Now you can tap into my expertise.
Got questions about hiking, backpacking, planning a family adventure, or any trip I’ve written about at The Big Outside?
Email them to me at michael@thebigoutside.com. For just $75, I’ll give you an in-depth, customized trip-planning consult via email or over the phone. We will cover all necessary pre-trip planning, from any needed permit to questions about season and weather, logistics, and gear, as well as how to execute your trip on the ground in the safest and most enjoyable way.
  “Michael, you provided invaluable guidance during our phone conversation. Some destinations such as Utah have so many options that it can be overwhelming. Your pointers made planning my trip easier. It felt like a friend providing useful, sincere advice. Thanks!”
—Armando (comment posted at bottom of this page)
  I will not only answer all of your questions, but I’ll answer all the questions you may not know to ask. I’m always happy to answer follow-up questions via email.
Whether you have a specific trip in mind, or you’ve identified a park or region but you need help deciding exactly where to go and what to do, I can help you out.
You can draw on my deep experience, and I will help ensure your trip is a success.
  “To anyone considering a backpacking trip, we’d highly recommend consulting with Michael. You will not regret it.”
—Tim (comment posted at bottom of this page)
  Write to me and I will tell you whether I can answer your questions. (I usually can.) If you choose to have me help you out, you can submit your payment using the Support button below.
I will give you a 25% off discount coupon for a one-year subscription to The Big Outside if you purchase my Ask Me service. Email me at michael@thebigoutside.com for details.
Purchase a Premium Subscription and get a one-year subscription to The Big Outside PLUS one Ask Me trip-planning consult (a $124.95 value for $109.95). Email me with any questions.
See comments from other readers whom I’ve helped plan a trip at the bottom of this page.
See also my downloadable e-guides to some of the best backpacking trips I’ve taken. You will also find helpful information and menus of all the stories at this blog about trips I’ve taken at my All Trips, Skills, and Gear Reviews pages.
Thanks for reading my blog. I look forward to hearing from you.
—Michael Lanza
  Buy my Ask Me trip-planning service and get 25% off a one-year subscription to The Big Outside!
Email me at michael@thebigoutside.com.
  ♦
Ready for my help custom-planning your trip? You can submit your $75 payment for my services using this Support button. Thank you for reading and supporting The Big Outside.








♦
  Email
Share on Tumblr
Get My Free Email Newsletter
Enter your email address for updates about new stories, gear reviews, and expert tips!
55 RESPONSES TO ASK ME
Kelsey Phillips   |  June 4, 2018 at 3:01 pm
Hey Michael,
Thank you for your in-depth recommendations on the Alta Via 2. Your hiking knowledge and firsthand experience was invaluable. My wife and I are super confident about this hike and what is possible based on your input.
To other readers of this blog: I highly recommend Michael to anyone in need of hiking advise, strategies, and/or creating an itinerary when taking on your next backpacking adventure. He is super flexible, stays in constant communication, provides more information than asked, clear and concise, and will try and answer any questions you have. I will for sure be using him in the future with any hikes that I am unfamiliar with.
Thanks again!
MichaelALanza   |  June 4, 2018 at 3:08 pm
Thanks for that comment, Kelsey, I appreciate it. I’m sure you two will have a fantastic trip on the Alta Via 2.
For other readers who are curious, we’re talking about a hut-to-hut trek on the Alta Via 2 in Italy’s Dolomite Mountains, which I wrote about in this story: https://thebigoutside.com/the-worlds-most-beautiful-trail-trekking-the-alta-via-2-through-italys-dolomite-mountains/.
Happy and safe travels, Kelsey.
Tim Jenkins   |  May 20, 2018 at 8:32 am
Michael,
I just wanted to say thank you for all of the extremely helpful info you provided to my wife and I for our upcoming backpacking trip to the Sawtooths in a few weeks. We were able to consider some route changes due to snow in the higher elevations and the links you provided have been very valuable. You answered every question we had very thoroughly.
To anyone considering a backpacking trip, we’d highly recommend consulting with Michael first. You will not regret it.
Gregory Leyh   |  March 17, 2018 at 12:18 pm
Michael, thanks very much for your detailed and very helpful advice about my recent trip to Zion National Park. At Zion my wife and I got to Angel’s Landing, she stopped there, I started up the chains about 30 yards and decided it wasn’t for me, came back down and, based on your suggestion to hike the West Rim Trail, went up the West Rim, which I thought was a great, scenic, unpopulated hike that I really loved. Next day I hiked around Zion on several of the trails, just taking it all in and having a wonderful day.
Day 3 was Bryce Canyon and that place kind of blew me away. I did the hike you suggested, combining the Navajo and Peekaboo loops. Peekaboo is a really fun trail, where I met some great people along the way, lots of picture taking at the Cathedral, Window of Walls, etc. I would not have done these trails without your guidance, so I’m thankful to you.
MichaelALanza   |  March 17, 2018 at 12:23 pm
Congrats, Greg, it sounds like your trip was a huge success, I’m very happy about that. Thanks for the nice words. Get in touch whenever you’d like help planning another hiking trip.
Bob   |  March 16, 2018 at 12:01 pm
I want to give Michael a HUGE shout out for the help he gave us on our call. He was incredibly informative and it made our trip planning so much easier. Plus, I’m sure our trip will be significantly better because of the advice he gave. Our call was the best money I’ve spent in a long time!
MichaelALanza   |  March 16, 2018 at 12:06 pm
Thanks, Bob. I’m sure you’ll have an excellent trip. Safe travels.
Eric   |  February 11, 2018 at 5:46 pm
Hi Micheal.
Thanks for the great writing, pictures, and tips regarding the Tetons. I’ve secured my permits for a Teton Crest Trail adventure this August. I can’t wait to experience this scenic trail first-hand. My permit has two nights in Cascade South Fork. Question: what is your opinion of climbing up South Teton from the West Ridge? From topo maps and pictures, it looks possible, but I can’t find much information on the topic and you seem to know the park like the back of your hand. Thoughts?
MichaelALanza   |  February 11, 2018 at 7:01 pm
Hi Eric, thanks for the nice compliment. I had a very similar idea once some years back–that I could hike and scramble from Avalanche Divide, which is the 10,000+-foot saddle between Avalanche Canyon and South Fork of Cascade, over the South Teton and into the South Fork of Garnet Canyon (then descend Garnet). I actually got on the phone with a park climbing ranger, who informed me that the South Teton is ringed by cliffs of terrible, crumbling, dangerous rock. When I subsequently (some years later) climbed the South Teton via its normal route, from the South Fork of Garnet Canyon, I got a look at the mountainside I’d been thinking about, and that ranger was right. It’s a nightmare.
I’ve seen the South Teton’s west slopes from Avalanche Canyon (I’ve backpacked down and dayhiked up Avalanche Canyon), and it’s all pretty much the same very convoluted topography of steep, exposed cliffs of bad rock and lots of features that would make route-finding very difficult, even if there appeared to be a safe route.
In short, I wouldn’t recommend it.
However, I am very familiar with the entire TCT and areas around Avalanche Canyon and the South Fork of Cascade and farther south; I have taken some safe, off-trail routes in amazing terrain. If you’re interested in more-detailed suggestions, check out how I handle such inquiries at my Ask Me page (https://thebigoutside.com/ask-me/) and emaill me.
Thanks for the good question. Have a great trip.
Sarah Almstrand   |  November 5, 2017 at 9:15 pm
Hi Michael –
I have loved reading your blog when I can and even bought your book. I really can’t justify buying a subscription right now as I really can’t do any hiking at this point in my life. I understand that you need to do it though and wish you all the best of luck!
Best,
Sarah
Sandra Julian   |  September 25, 2017 at 4:50 pm
Hi Michael,
I wanted to write to you and thank you once again for all of your help in planning my trip. I should have written long before now but time got away from me this summer. I wanted to let you know that we had a great experience and enjoyed every moment of the trip. It was absolutely amazing and I am hopeful that my kids (although they thoroughly enjoyed it) will appreciate it even more as they grow older.
Each park was special in its own way and it is difficult to say what I enjoyed the most. If I had to name one thing it would be the Highline Trail at Glacier National Park. As I reflect on the trip, there really isn’t anything that I regret. I would do it all the same way if I had it to do over again.
I hope you had a great summer and made some family memories of your own….I am sure that you did.
Thanks again,
Sandy
MichaelALanza   |  September 25, 2017 at 7:41 pm
You’re very welcome, Sandy. I’m glad it went so well for your family. Now you can start thinking about your next one!
Dave Fraatz   |  September 6, 2017 at 9:13 am
I recently finished my trip to The Sawtooths. It was amazing! I most enjoyed Sand Mountain Pass and the descent to Toxaway Lake in the afternoon light. I am hard-pressed to find any equals, perhaps the Grand Canyon and Yosemite. I visited nearly all of the places you suggested. I hope they never create a Sawtooths National Park. Thanks so much for helping me plan a route.
Next on my agenda is the High Sierra (Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks and perhaps Mt Whitney), which you also helped me plan. Thanks again.
MichaelALanza   |  September 6, 2017 at 3:52 pm
Hi Dave, good on you for doing such an amazing hike in the Sawtooths, certainly one of my favorite mountain ranges. The High Sierra will be an appropriate follow-up. Thanks for reading and supporting my blog and safe and happy future adventures to you. Keep in touch.
Armando Lopez   |  June 29, 2017 at 7:53 am
Michael, you provided invaluable guidance during our phone conversation. Some destinations such as Utah have so many options that it can be overwhelming. Your pointers and pros and cons made planning my trip easier. More than a service it felt like a friend providing useful, sincere advice. Thanks!
MichaelALanza   |  June 29, 2017 at 7:58 am
Have a great trip, Armando. Glad I could help with it.
Robert   |  June 5, 2017 at 3:43 pm
Thanks, Michael, you were extremely prompt and thorough in answering my Ask Me question. You guided me to specific blog posts and provided new information that can only be obtained through extensive first-hand experience. I want to make the most of my family’s time in the backcountry, and your advice will definitely help. Thanks again!
MichaelALanza   |  June 5, 2017 at 3:49 pm
Thanks, Robert, I appreciate that, and wish you a safe and wonderful trip.
Dave   |  June 1, 2017 at 10:26 am
Michael,
Thanks a lot for the phone consultation. It did a great job of answering some major issues for an upcoming trip this fall. I’ll definitely keep you in mind when planning for future trips.
MichaelALanza   |  June 1, 2017 at 10:47 am
Hi Dave, I’m glad I could be helpful to you. Good luck and safe travels, looks like you have a fantastic summer ahead of you.
Michael Nelson   |  April 24, 2017 at 2:04 pm
Hello Michael,
Would really appreciate any recommendations you could make for 3 day two night backcountry hiking/camping in Colorado. Our group of guys have done Sahale (nice pic) and the Narrows. We’ve already booked our flights into Denver and are looking for something hopefully no more than a three hour drive to a trailhead. Open to any distance and/or elevation… lake or water nearby would be great. Any insight would be greatly appreciated!
MichaelALanza   |  April 24, 2017 at 2:14 pm
Hi Michael, thanks for reading my blog. Sahale and the Narrows are two tough acts to follow! Go to my All Trips By State page (https://thebigoutside.com/all-trips-by-state/) and scroll down to Colorado for links to stories I’ve already posted. Those should give you some ideas. If you’d like to talk further, email me (see note at the top of this page). Good luck.
Chris   |  April 6, 2017 at 6:45 am
Michael,
We are trying to plan a trip for the Canyonlands and just watched your video on Squaw Canyon to Chelser Park. Approximately how many miles round trip was this and what campsites did you stay at? Was this a one nighter or did you guys did multiple nights on this hike? Thanks!
MichaelALanza   |  April 6, 2017 at 7:57 am
Hi Chris, you’ll find all of those itinerary details in the planning section at the bottom of my story about that trip: https://thebigoutside.com/no-straight-lines-backpacking-and-hiking-in-canyonlands-and-arches-national-parks/
Good luck.
Jocilyn   |  May 5, 2017 at 2:59 pm
Hi!
I am wondering about the total mileage of the 5 day Wind River Backpacking trip you have suggested to Shawna here:
https://thebigoutside.com/ask-me-what-backpacking-trip-do-you-suggest-in-the-wind-river-range/
It looks like a great loop, but just trying to figure out the total mileage for this loop. Thanks!
MichaelALanza   |  May 9, 2017 at 12:17 pm
Hi Jocilyn, I’ve hiked parts of that route but not the entire thing, and I’m sorry, but I don’t have the precise mileage. The reader was looking for a trip of seven to 12 miles per day, and I think that route’s total distance would fall within those parameters. I can only suggest that you try to measure it out on a map as accurately as possible. Good luck.
Dave Prefontaine   |  February 27, 2017 at 9:04 am
Hi Michael, My wife and now 1 1/2 year old boy have grown out of our Hubba Hubba and are looking for new 3p tent for the up coming season. I was looking at the Carbon Reflex 3 but am concerned about durability. We are also considering a Zpacks Triplex for its excellent weight savings, but would miss the star gazing potential. Do you have any experience with these tents? We would really like to keep the weight down as much as possible as we have many snacks and toys that have been added to our gear list! Any ideas would be helpful.
Regards
MichaelALanza   |  March 2, 2017 at 8:31 am
Hi Dave, thanks for writing and following my blog. I’ve used the MSR Carbon Reflex 2 and didn’t review it because I broke a pole and I found it really cramped for space for two people; I generally only review gear and apparel that I like and can recommend to readers. You may have seen I reviewed the MSR Freelite 2 (https://thebigoutside.com/gear-review-msr-freelite-2-ultralight-tent/). I haven’t used the ZPacks Triplex.
I can give you more specific advice to help you find the right tent if you want to email me (see top of this page). You may first want to scroll through my Ask Me gear page (above) and tent reviews (https://thebigoutside.com/tag/backpacking-tent-reviews/) for possible answers to your questions, and see my “5 Tips For Buying a Backpacking Tent.” (https://thebigoutside.com/5-tips-for-how-to-buy-a-backpacking-tent/)
Thanks again for following my blog.
David   |  February 12, 2017 at 10:26 pm
Love your site Michael!
Did a ton of day-hikes/car-camping in 2016 with a more of this level adventuring planned for 2017 (Mt Olympic/YosemiteValley/Banff/Jasper). Personally though, I can already sense that I need more.
Might you have a perfect 2-3 days backpacking trip up your sleeve fitting for 2 novice backpackers consisting of husband and wife? Preferably for March if possible? Any suggestions would be great. Thank you.
Aaron Morris   |  February 7, 2017 at 7:37 am
Hey there Michael, Ive got a question about an upcoming trip a group of guys and myself are planning to do. In August, we are planning on doing the Spider Gap-Buck Creek Pass Loop. I know there was a fire in Buck Creek and the trail back to Trinity Trailhead is closed and the Forest Service does not know if they will be able to clear the trail and open up the trail this year. I wanted to know if you knew anything about extending the loop to High Pass, down Napeequa Valley, up to Little Giant Pass and then exiting at the Little Giant Trailhead. Do you know how many miles this may add to the trip or if this would be a good alternative if Buck Creek Trail is closed? Thanks a bunch
Michael Lanza   |  February 9, 2017 at 2:37 pm
Hi Aaron, great trip you’re planning. As you know, I wrote about it in this story: https://thebigoutside.com/wild-heart-of-the-glacier-peak-wilderness-backpacking-the-spider-gap-buck-creek-pass-loop/.
Too bad the Buck Creek Trail is closed. On a previous backpacking trip up to Buck Creek Pass, I hiked the user trail (not shown on maps, but quite obvious) from the campground at Buck Creek Pass up onto Liberty Cap, and then along that 7,000-foot ridge southeast to High Pass. Beautiful hike when it’s clear (though quite exposed in wind and weather). I went as far as Triad Lake, which is not named on maps, but is the lake that Triad Creek drains, right before High Pass. I thought about bushwhacking from High Pass to the Napeequa valley, but I didn’t, so I’m not sure what the terrain is like. It looks like there’s potential for thick bushwhacking and tricky route-finding with steep terrain and maybe cliff bands, but it might go. Then you obviously have trail hiking back to Trinity.
I don’t know where the Buck Creek Trail is closed, but there may be another option for you. I have friends who backpacked another user trail that diverges off the Buck Creek Trail probably less than a mile east-southeast of Buck Creek Pass and climbs onto a high bench traversing over to Massie Lake. (I remember passing the junction once and noticing it, though it’s unmarked, blocked off by the Forest Service, and easy to overlook.) The Green Trails Holden map no. 113 shows an unmaintained trail from Massie Lake down to Trail 1550 in the Chiwawa Valley; my friends hiked that trail. They said it was buggy camping at Massie Lake, but otherwise a good hike. That was probably several years ago.
I certainly can’t say definitively whether either route would work or recommend either one, and I’m sure either would be strenuous and require expert skills. But that’s what I know about that area. Good luck.
Meme   |  January 20, 2017 at 10:14 pm
Hi Michael!
I want to take my boyfriend on a modest (35 miles or less) backpacking trip in the southwest US for his 40th birthday. I am having a hard time finding a hike that fits. We will be going in July so avoiding National Parks in the desert are trying to be avoided to miss some of the heat.
With many thanks!
Meme
MichaelALanza   |  January 21, 2017 at 7:29 am
Hi Meme, July will be quite hot throughout the Southwest. You should plan a Southwest hike for spring or fall, and see my story “The 10 Best Backpacking Trips in the Southwest.” (https://thebigoutside.com/the-10-best-backpacking-trips-in-the-southwest/) In July, I’d head for the mountains. Check out my All Trips page: https://thebigoutside.com/all-trips/.
Good luck.
Beau   |  January 16, 2017 at 8:38 pm
Hi. I was planning on doing a 2-night backpacking trip into the Needles District of Canyonlands. I am stuck on trying to figure out how to carry the recommended 1 gallon/day water. Do you have any tips or thoughts to help me with this? Thanks in advance.
MichaelALanza   |  January 17, 2017 at 7:02 am
Hi Beau,
I use an MSR Dromedary (http://bit.ly/2k0SRlG) when I have to carry extra water. There’s a 10L size and smaller ones. They’re collapsible and roll up when empty. I place it high in my pack, close to my shoulder blades, for best weight distribution in the pack.
Good luck. Great trip.
Sam   |  January 3, 2017 at 9:33 am
Hi Michael! I’ve enjoyed gaining a lot of useful information and insight from your blogs about Grand Teton National Park. Some buddies and I are planning a backpacking trip along the TCT this year and I’m tentatively leaning towards sometime in September. You’ve mentioned the trail being near a ghost town after labor day and I’m curious as to why. Is there any reason to avoid the trail in the first week or two of September?? Thanks for your advise!
MichaelALanza   |  January 3, 2017 at 12:10 pm
Hi Sam, thanks for the nice words. I like heading into Western mountain ranges like the Tetons after Labor Day because most people take their vacations in summer before Labor Day, and that’s the primary reason why ranges like the Tetons get much less busy in September. For the Teton Crest Trail, you’ll also find it easier to get a permit after Labor Day. Of course, there’s a slightly increased chance of seeing fresh snowfall in September, particularly the later you go in the month. (I generally prefer the first half of September.) But that’s impossible to predict far in advance, and the odds are good that you’ll see cooler but summer-like weather: mild days, cool nights.
As examples, this year, we saw a snowstorm over Labor Day weekend in the Idaho mountains and the Tetons, and glorious weather most of the rest of September. A friend and I backpacked five nice days in the North Cascades in the last week of September with mostly excellent weather. Hope that answers your question. Good luck with your trip planning.
Shreya   |  December 29, 2016 at 10:01 am
Dear Michael,
I am trying to plan a scenic hiking trip with my almost 4 year old boy and husband. Both have asthma but husband is serious competitive rower and son is also pretty active in terms of biking, running and learning how to swim. We live in Houston. Do you have any suggestions ? Or what should I even aim for.
Thanks
MichaelALanza   |  January 2, 2017 at 10:05 am
Hi Shreya, start with some of the posts listed on my Ask Me page covering Family Adventures (https://thebigoutside.com/ask-me-family-adventures/), and see my “10 Tips For Raising Outdoors-Loving Kids” (https://thebigoutside.com/10-tips-for-raising-outdoors-loving-kids/). I’m not sure whether you’re looking for that type of advice or trip suggestions, though, but you’ll find the latter at my Family Adventures page (https://thebigoutside.com/family-adventures-2/). Good luck.
A Baer   |  December 1, 2016 at 3:53 pm
Michael, planning a SE/SC Utah trip next year. wondering your advice on GPS usage? I’ve loaded some extra maps on my Garmin Nuvi and hope it will get me around on the BLM roads. Will it suffice getting from point A to B using Lat/Long??? or do I need a specialty unit? Or do you use off-line maps on an iPhone and such? Thanks.
MichaelALanza   |  December 2, 2016 at 6:42 am
Hi, well, believe it or not, I generally use printed atlases from DeLorme and Benchmark Maps to navigate on back roads, and the maps program on my phone when needed. Primitive, I know, but simple, cheap, and effective. I expect the maps you’ve loaded onto your Garmin would do the trick, too. Have a good trip.
Adiyan Haran   |  May 30, 2016 at 2:06 pm
FYI, a web site worth knowing about,
http://www.archesoftheescalante.com
michaellanza   |  December 23, 2015 at 5:12 am
Thanks Tricia, I really appreciate that. Happy and safe travels to you as well.
Tricia @ www.roadtriptheworld.com   |  December 22, 2015 at 10:25 am
I just wanted to say how much I love reading your blog! Your posts can always be counted on to inspire adventure. I also wanted to let you know that I just finished writing a post about my favorite travel blogs that inspire adventure and I’ve included your blog in it. I should be posting it in the next couple of day. Happy Travels!
Tommy K. Hindman   |  September 19, 2015 at 8:15 am
My fiancé and I are planning a cross-country trip to Glacier National Park when I finish my Master’s in the spring. Any advice on a 5-6 day trip we can take in the beginning of May or mid May? I see the season doesn’t really start until late May but this is the only time we will be able to go. Thank you again for such an awesome blog.
michaellanza   |  September 20, 2015 at 7:58 am
Hi Tommy, Glacier’s certainly fabulous at any time of year. I’ve been there in early April, skiing in the backcountry. Higher elevations remain completely snow-covered, with potential avalanche hazard, into early summer, so hiking in the mountains is difficult and dangerous in May. You’ll find some info about hiking in spring at http://www.nps.gov/glac/planyourvisit/spring.htm. In early May, you might get lucky and find some lower-elevation trails on the edges of the park relatively snow-free, like in the Lake McDonald and St. Mary areas, and maybe in the Belly River Valley in the park’s northeast corner. Unfortunately, it’s just not an ideal time to see much of Glacier.
Thanks for following my blog, I hope you subscribe and consider making a donation of support (scroll up this page for the Support button). Good luck with your trip.
Joe   |  September 1, 2015 at 3:21 pm
Love your blog…….will be doing the Toxaway Lake to Alice Lake Loop over the Labor Day weekend and wanted to get your thoughts about adding some mileage by taking the trail over to Vernon Lake then going off trail from Vernon back to Toxaway…….is off trail hiking from Vernon to Toxaway doable……thanks for your jelp……jh
michaellanza   |  September 1, 2015 at 5:51 pm
Thanks Joe. I’ve wondered that same question. On a map it looks like it’s not steep or far to hike from Vernon to Toxaway, but I’ve never done it. I may try it sometime. I’ve been throughout that area on trail, it’s all nice.
Tristan Jones   |  June 21, 2015 at 10:35 pm
hi micheal! i want to make 2-5 day hike in the sawtooth mountain range near the end of august. i want to have a visible trail but one i am less likely to run into a bunch of people. maybe one that circles around and back to my car? im not afraid of heights and i feel confident enough with my physical endurance. i feel like scrambles and mellow climbs would only make the journey that much more enjoyable! if you could recommend a really gnarly yet satisfying backpacking trip i would greatly appreciate it. thank you
michaellanza   |  June 22, 2015 at 4:22 am
Hi Tristan, if you want to hike a loop, you should look at the Alice Lake-Toxaway Lake loop in this story, https://thebigoutside.com/ask-me-what-are-the-best-hikes-in-idahos-sawtooths/, or a longer loop in the southern Sawtooths that I describe in this story: https://thebigoutside.com/going-after-goals-backpacking-in-idahos-sawtooth-mountains/
You’ll also find point-to-point backpacking trips in the first story that are great trips. As for avoiding crowds, August is the most popular month, and weekends are obviously busier than weekdays, but most of the Sawtooths really don’t see that many backpackers. Good luck.
Gary   |  June 1, 2015 at 12:42 pm
Hello Michael,
Could you please recommend a 4-5 day backcountry trip in the Grand Teton Range that could include camp sites located outside of the park (maybe the Jedediah Smith Wilderness area), so I would not need to get a overnight permit in the park? I do have a 1 night permit for Paintbrush, so I was hoping to make that my last night for camping inside the park, then walk out to Jenny Lake on the last day. I was thinking the starting point could be around the top of Rendezvous Peak via the tramway? I have done day hikes in the Tetons, but never a backcountry trip, so I would appreciate your input. I’m going to be going the last week of August. I have basic skills with compass and map reading, so some off trail hiking is o.k.. I’m looking for solitude and will be solo hiking. Thank you for your time. Much appreciated!
michaellanza   |  June 3, 2015 at 9:02 am
Hi Gary, Take a look at a map of Grand Teton National Park and you’ll see that you have limited options for camping outside the park but still reaching Paintbrush Canyon for your last night. You can start at the top of the Jackson Hole Ski Resort tram and hike down into Granite Canyon, but that’s inside the park; to get outside the park to camp, you’d have to hike a bit south on the Teton Crest Trail out of Granite Canyon, and I’m told that Moose Lake in the Jedediah Smith Wilderness is a nice spot to camp. Then you’d turn around the next day and hike north on the Teton Crest Trail to Alaska Basin, which is outside the park, to camp your second night.
From Alaska Basin, it would be a big day, over 13 miles with two passes (Hurricane, which is easier, and Paintbrush Divide, which is a big climb), to reach Upper Paintbrush.
But it’s easier to get a first-come permit for camping in the southern areas of the park than it is for Paintbrush Canyon, which you already have. My suggestion: When you arrive at the park, go to the backcountry desk and try to add nights in the park to your existing permit for a night in Paintbrush. Death Canyon Shelf and South Fork Cascade Canyon offer some of the park’s best camping. See all of my Ask Me posts above about the Teton Crest Trail.
I have not backpacked much in the Jedediah Smith Wilderness (only the southern end of the Teton Crest Trail and a dayhike up Table Mountain from Teton Canyon on the west side). If you want to explore that area, you’ll see there are trails through it on the west side of the Tetons, but only a few spots where they link up with trails in the park. The shuttle is also much longer and more complicated (or expensive) if you start and finish at trailheads on the west and east sides of the Tetons instead of trailheads in the park (east side).
Sharmaine Popov   |  May 26, 2015 at 9:31 pm
Hi…could you do an article on – what to pack? I’m going away for a weekend and I just filled up an Osprey 65 L pack – and I don’t even have a stove or tent in it! To make it worse…what I do have – air mattress, sleeping bag etc is new…like 2015 so it is not old heavy stuff. And end to end list for a couple different outing lengths would be great…
MichaelALanza   |  May 27, 2015 at 5:21 am
Hi Sharmaine, thanks for that suggestion, it’s a good one. I’ve received it from other readers, too, and I plan on posting my gear checklist in June (2015). Soon.
michaellanza   |  June 22, 2015 at 4:23 am
Hi Sharmaine, here’s that backpacking checklist: https://thebigoutside.com/ask-me-can-you-suggest-a-backpacking-gear-checklist/
LEAVE A REPLY
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
Name *
Email *
Website
Notify me of new posts by email.
This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.
