Szklarska Poreba is one of the largest ski resorts in the Polish Karkonosze. Winter sports enthusiasts can enjoy 20 ski lifts, including six located on the slopes of Szrenica, towering over the city.
These are mainly T-bar lifts, and one chairlift divided into two sections. Built in 1962, it has been repeatedly modernized and is able to bring to the summit of Szrenica more than 1,400 people per hour.
The new chairlift "Karkonosze Express" was opened in 2010. This "six-couch" is the longest and most modern statement of this kind in Poland. Its length is 2,393 m. Skiers reach the top in just eight and a half minutes.
Below the lift station was right next to an existing section I to Szrenica. The upper station is located close to Christmas Stone, slopes above the bifurcation Lolobrygida and Śnieżynka. Almost 2,000 people go to the top within an hour. More about the new lift ...
5 pistes are prepared on the Szrenica slopes with a total length of over 10 km. These are ski trails for skiers of varying skill. Everyone will find something for themselves.
Good skiers, are provided with the most best emotions due to the FIS trail, whose slope angle is in some places even 50%. The longest trail - Lolobrygida downhill has a length of more than 4400 m. The well-known, popular and rather easy "Pooh" trail offers night skiing until 22:00.
Above it are a lot of shorter routes, located on the slopes of minor hills located in Szklarska Poreba and the route towards Jakuszyce (Babiniec, Wiciarka). Almost 20 km of pistes wait for skiers to come to Szklarska Poreba.
Excellent climatic conditions, comparable to those in the Alps, help maintain the thick snow cover up to early spring. Due to the northern slopes skiing goes on here until April and, despite high temperatures and the March sun, the snow remains cold for a long time.
You can confidently plan your holiday in Szklarska Poreba not only in the peak of winter season, but also in late winter and early spring, with guaranteed snow. Skiing in March has its regular enthusiasts, who plan to ride in the warm spring sun every year. The slopes are snowed in addition, many of them are well lit, giving the opportunity to ski after dark.
MUST SEE MOVIE - SkiArena and EASY SKI
Cyclical events and downhill competitions in Szklarska Poreba:

"Łabski" Cup in downhill skiing
Primary Schools’ Championships in skiing and snowboarding
Preschoolers Championships downhill
Four Tournament Ski slopes - skiing competitions for children
Sudetes Youth Sports League - competitions in skiing
Arcades Night Jam Session - freestyle competitions in snowboarding and skiing
Radio Trójka Cup downhill
Nationwide Youth Olympics in sports
Stars on snow - the stars of the Polish show business on the SKI-ARENA Szrenica slopes
Mayor's Cup Szklarska Poreba in skiing and snowboarding
Egon Myśliwiec Memorial in downhill skiing
