Composite replicated mirrors are gaining increasing attention for space-based applications due to their lower density, tailorable mechanical properties, and rapid manufacturing times over state-of-the-art glass mirrors. Ultraviolet (UV)-cured mirrors provide a route by which high-quality mirrors can be manufactured at relatively low processing temperatures that minimize residual stresses. The successful utilization of these mirrors requires nanometer scale dimensional stability after both thermal cycling and hygrothermal exposure. We investigate the effect of gamma irradiation as a process to improve the stability of UV replicated mirrors. Gamma radiation exposure was shown to increase the cure state of these mirrors as evidenced by an increase in modulus, glass transition temperature, and the thermal degradation behavior with dosage. Gas chromatography–mass spectroscopy also showed evidence of consumption of the primary monomers and initiation of the photosensitive agent with gamma exposure. The gamma-exposed mirrors exhibited significant improvement in stability even after multiple thermal cycling in comparison with nonirradiated composite mirrors. Though improvements in the cure state contribute to the overall stability, the radiation dosage was also shown to reduce the film stress of the mirror by over 80% as evidenced using Stoney replicated specimens. This reduction in residual stress is encouraging considering the utilization of these structures for space applications. This paper shows that replicated composite mirrors are a viable alternative to conventional optical structures.
High-quality, lightweight composite replicated mirrors have a number of potential advantages over standard glass mirrors for use in space applications. They have a lower density, tailorable mechanical properties, higher thermal conductivity, improved damage tolerance, and reduced manufacturing times over state-of-the-art glass mirrors.1,2 In contrast, conventional mirrors require additional postprocessing to achieve high-precision grade specifications, such as grinding, conventional polishing, single-point diamond machining, magnetic rheological finishing, and ion milling, that further increase not only the processing time and cost but also increase the possibility of fracture during the manufacturing process.