Data products from high spectral resolution astronomical polarimeters are often limited by fringes. Fringes can skew derived magnetic field properties from spectropolarimetric data. Fringe removal algorithms can also corrupt the data if the fringes and object signals are too similar. For some narrow-band imaging polarimeters, fringes change the calibration retarder properties and dominate the calibration errors. Systems-level engineering tools for polarimetric instrumentation require accurate predictions of fringe amplitudes, periods for transmission, diattenuation, and retardance. The relevant instabilities caused by environmental, thermal, and optical properties can be modeled and mitigation tools developed. We create spectral polarization fringe amplitude and temporal instability predictions by applying the Berreman calculus and simple interferometric calculations to optics in beams of varying F/ number. We then apply the formalism to superachromatic six-crystal retarders in converging beams under beam thermal loading in outdoor environmental conditions for two of the world’s largest observatories: the 10-m Keck telescope and the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST). DKIST will produce a 300-W optical beam, which has imposed stringent requirements on the large diameter six-crystal retarders, dichroic beamsplitters, and internal optics. DKIST retarders are used in a converging beam with F/ ratios between 8 and 62. The fringe spectral periods, amplitudes, and thermal models of retarder behavior assisted DKIST optical designs and calibration plans with future application to many astronomical spectropolarimeters. The Low Resolution Imaging Spectrograph with polarimetry instrument at Keck also uses six-crystal retarders in a converging F  /  13 beam in a Cassegrain focus exposed to summit environmental conditions providing observational verification of our predictions.
In many astronomical spectropolarimeters, spectral fringes in intensity and polarization are the dominant source of error. These errors can either involve corrupting the measured signals or a skewing of the calibrations. Fringe amplitudes can be over 10% with strong changes in fringe characteristics over time, field angle, wavelength, and optical configuration. These fringes often have similar characteristics to the solar polarimetric signals. This similarity complicates the data analysis as fringe removal techniques can corrupt the measurement and skew the properties of the object derived from those measurements. Accurate tools to estimate fringe amplitudes and polarization characteristics are critical for assessing optical designs, evaluating the trade-offs in retarder location, and preparing techniques for fringe removal in postfacto processing of instrument data products. Fringes must be estimated in converging or diverging beams along with dependence on optical design properties such as cover windows, oil layers, and antireflection coatings. This must be coupled to thermal behavior as environmental and optical heat load control is critical for the instrument design and fabrication process. Particular challenges arise in modern solar instrumentation where beams are steeply converging and heat loads can be severe.