Happy New Year!
This blog is now 13 years old. As I said last year, I understand that the “age of the blog” is long gone and most people use social media instead. But I will continue posting here at Cycling Challenge for another year.
2017 was a fun year on the bike. I climbed more metres than I ever have even as 75% of my kilometres were on a mountain bike. I just feel happier during/after going cycling. I also rode more locally than usual. I am lucky to have lots of great options from home – I must have climbed Mont Salève 50 times – many different ways both road and mtb.
Mont Salève – Geneva below the clouds
In the past few days, I’ve posted 3 “reviews” of 2017:
2017 – Twelve Months in Photos
The Ten Best Road Bike Rides of 2017
The Ten Best Unpaved Rides of 2017
Anyway, without further ado,
My 2018 Cycling Challenge:
Cycle 100 Different Cols
This was a goal last year. I managed roughly 150 separate cols, of course occasionally “cheating” with some Col Hunting routes that included a bunch in a single ride. I’ll remember to revisit old favourites as well as searching for new cols.
Above Col du Grand Renard
Find 20 “Good” New Climbs
This gets harder and harder every year, but the Alps are a big place, and I have lots of ideas – both paved and unpaved.
I managed this challenge in 2017 mainly with unpaved routes. In 2018, I’ll try and ride a few more paved climbs for the first time.
The paved hairpins to Torri di Fraele was a great discovery in 2017
A Few Big Rides in Austria
I failed this part of my 2017 challenge. Twice I had a week planned and canceled due to weather (it’s a long way to go without sun). I’ve only ever ridden a big climb there once, riding a Tour de Suisse sportive up to the Retttenbachgletscher.
The good news, I did at least get the chance to practice my improving (if not impressive) German skills with visits to Munich* and Vienna in 2017. Doreen and I enjoyed the excellent cycling infrastructure in both cities.
Danube / Donau River with Doreen (Vienna City Bikes)
Munich Olympiapark with Doreen
Sad girls
Olympiapark
Parliament

But I am determined to ride a few of the many high Alpine roads in Austria in 2018.
*yes, I know Munich is in Germany not Austria
Some Gravel Touring
Embarrassingly, I do very little “here-to-there” overnight touring. I should try and fix that in 2018. I have three lead ideas at the moment. I will do at least one of these in 2018, perhaps more. Feel free to suggest any other ideas!
The Torino-Nice Rally – This can take advantage of some of the great old gravel roads high along the French/Italian border.
Tour of Mont Blanc – unpaved. Not certain, I think I’d need 3 or 4 days.
Some of the official Swiss Mountain bike National Routes. There are three national Mtb routes, the eastern part of the Alpine route looks particularly high and interesting …. and new to me.
Endless fun gravel routes on Italian / French border
Another Big Climb to See the Sunrise
In 2017, Steel Wheeler buddy Tim and I cycled up Grand Colombier in the dark to reach the summit for a glorious sunrise. It was one of the highlights of the year. We’ve been brainstorming Cime de la Bonette as a possible candidate for 2018. It should have commanding eastern views. We’ll see.
Ride above 3000 Metres
It’s not easy to get above 3000 metres on a bike in Europe. I’ve done it 6 times – Colle del Sommeiller is only 2993 metres, but I wandered up a side mound. It’s always very difficult, but worth the effort. In 2017, I reached Gornergrat at 3135 metres and it probably my favourite ride of the year.
near summit of Gornergrat
See here for 25 of the highest unpaved roads in Europe.
Heading above 3000 metres in 2015 – Col de Rosael
A few more rides with friends
This was in my 2016 and 2017 Challenges as well. I am a cheerful loner on a bike. But managed to be a bit more sociable in 2017, in particular, I had a very fun trip to Flanders with a bunch of friends from www.podiumcafe.com, a great Alps trip with Jens, and I become almost a regular at Wednesday Steel Wheeler Mont Salève ascents.
A few photos of friends from 2017.
Happy New Year!
2018 alps challenge Cycling
