Happy 2016 !
This blog started eleven years ago today, when I challenged my non-cycling self to bike 10,000 kilometres in 2005. It almost killed me, but I succeeded on Christmas Day, without ever riding more than 80 kms, and usually just 30 or so per ride.
Success! Christmas 2005:
Luckily, I am still fully addicted to cycling, especially uphill. These days I don’t take my Challenge quite as seriously as I did a decade ago. It is now more just the beginning of a plan for the year. Still, I seem to get motivated by New Year Resolutions.
Here are my Ten Favourite Rides from 2015. And here is my assessment of last year versus my 2015 Cycling Challenge.
Anyway, here is my 2016 Cycling Challenge:
Cycle 100 Different Cols
New stuff, old stuff. Just enjoy the ride. I try never to forget to re-visit the great stuff – especially when it’s close to home. Of course, it counts if I reach a col on cross country skis.
A Few Big Rides in Austria
I began learning Italian exactly two years ago today, and am at a level where I can happily have conversations, read books, etc. It has hugely increased my enjoyment of cycling in Italy.
So now I have begun learning some German with an eye on cycling in Austria (and of course Switzerland). I have some Austrian ideas such as Kitzbühel, Großglockner, Timmelsjoch, etc. We’ll see.
I could certainly use some more Austria cow photos:
Find 20 “Good” New Climbs
I am always making lists and still have plenty of ideas – especially off the beaten track. But suggestions always welcome!
Below: Col de la Bâthie was a wonderful surprise in 2015.
Continue searching for high unpaved “roads.”
Without a doubt the highlight of my last couple of years has been the switch to more high alps mountain biking. I would especially like to focus on some of the official National Swiss Mountain Bike routes that include some very interesting looking passes in eastern Switzerland.
Also, I hope to continue exploring the old military roads all along the French / Italian Alps border. I will certainly have another look at the amazing Strada dell’Assietta, approaching it from a different direction.
Strada Militare Colle delle Finestre meets Strada dell’Assietta
A Few Adventures with Doreen
My wife is not quite the cycling fanatic that I am. But she has succeeded in climbing many of the most famous climbs in the Alps. I am certain we can think up a few good bike adventures for 2016.
Above Grosse Scheidegg:
A few more rides with friends
I like riding alone. I often dash off somewhere at the last second and like to ride at my own pace (slow). But riding with good friends is always fun.
Occasionally they even let me force them to pose for a tripod photo:
Final Thoughts
Anyone that knows me understands that I am not a racer. I cycle slowly, stop frequently for photos. But that doesn’t mean I don’t enjoy some tough challenges. And I am addicted to trying to get high anywhere in the Alps. 2015 was a great year on the bike. I’m hoping for more of the same in 2016.
Happy New Year. Cheers, cin cin, santé, and of course prost!
A Galibier Beer
2016 alps challenge Cycling goals
