For an overview map and details on every route I have cycled in the Pyrenées see here.

Bike route 1832199 – powered by Bikemap 
Here is an alternate, quieter route to Col d’Aubisque from Argelès-Gazost. Most cyclists take the D918 direct main road. But frankly the first 10+ kilometres to Col du Soulor just aren’t interesting and can have a fair bit of traffic in summer.
For another excellent (and easier) alternate route to Aubisque via Col des Bordères – see here.
Leave Argelès on the D918 following signs to Aubisque and after a kilometre or so you will see a small sign to turn right to Col de Spandelles.
A few kms later there is another not-that-clearly-signed left turn …. then you can’t get lost.
It’s a tiny road to Spandelles, and tightly treed so few views, but it’s a good choice for the following reasons:
It’s very, very, quiet.
It’s almostly completely shaded, good in a heat-wave.
The descent on the other side is superb.
It leads to best side of Col du Soulor.
The other side is a different world. A scenic valley with open views of hairpins in the distance. It’s a lousy surface and technical descent – and I had to walk behind a herd of several hundred sheep for 10 minutes, chatting with a friendly farmer.
But it’s a beautiful:
At the bottom is a sharp left and then 12 kilometres up to Col du Soulor. This north version is quiet, and super scenic from the very start – in my opinion far better than the well known east side – and the final few kilometres are a cliff road with perfect views of the amazing Cirque du Litor.
View of north side of Soulor from Aubisque slopes:
At Col du Soulor I stopped for some calories – enjoying the usual large flock of sheep, cows, and even horses, wandering around.
The route then descends into the fabulous cliff road Cirque du Litor. I struggled to get a decent photo as rain clouds rolled in on my return.
There is now a toll collector at the entrance:
I’ve never done the east side of Aubisque, but the short stretch past Litor on the west side is just beautiful:
I was tired but happy with this challenging but superb and quiet loop – after Hautacam in the morning – so I celebrated at the Col sign before taking the direct descent back to Argelès. Fast, non technical and I reconfirmed: far less interesting than the route here.
Cheers:
8.4
VERY GOOD
Another quieter alternate route up Col d'Aubisque. Spandelles is OK, the north side of Soulor is the best side of Soulor, and Aubisque is lovely.
VIEWS
8.5
DIFFICULTY
8
QUIET / NO TRAFFIC
8.5
FUN FACTOR
8.5
USER RATINGS (7 VOTES)
6.5
argeles-gazost aubisque Cycling favourite France Pyrénées soulor spandelles
